---
layout: post
title: Python exercise
subtitle: This is the learning notes for Python
# cover-img: /assets/img/cover1.png
# thumbnail-img: /assets/img/thumbnail1.jpeg
# share-img: /assets/img/cover1.png
tags: [Python]
---

This is a learning note related to the Python learning and exercise, including but not limited to numpy, pytorch. Continuously updating...



1. The outputs of a same function name are different since importing a library.

```python
print(sum(range(5),-1))
## output: 9
from numpy import *
print(sum(range(5),-1))
## output: 10
```

* built-in function sum(iterable, start): `iterable` is a iterable (list, tuple, dict, etc).  `Start` **is a value that will be added to the sum of items of the iterable.** The default value of start is 0 (if omitted).
* numpy.sum(array, axis):  `array` are the elements to sum. `axis` is an integer indicating which axis or axes along to sum. **If `axis` is negative it counts from the last to the first axis.**



2. bitwise shift operator `<<` and `>>`

* `<<`: `x << y` returns `x` with the **bits shifted to the left** by `y` places. Same as multiplying `x` by `2**y`. 
* `>>`: `x >> y` returns `x` with the **bits shifted to the right** by `y` places. Same as dividing `x` by `2**y`.



3. generator function

A generator function doesn't return a single value but returns an iterator object with a sequence of values. It use `yield` rather `return`. The difference between `yield` and `return` is that `yield` returns a value and pauses the execution while maintaining the internal states, whereas the `return` statement returns a value and terminates the execution of the function.

```python
def generate():
  for x in range(10):
    yield x

a = np.fromiter(generate(), dtype = int)
print(a)
```

4. [broadcasting semantics](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/notes/broadcasting.html)
  Two tensors are “broadcastable” if the following rules hold:

    * Each tensor has at least one dimension.

    * When iterating over the dimension sizes, starting at the trailing dimension, the dimension sizes must either be equal, one of them is 1, or one of them does not exist.

      
[numpy exercise](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1hrNbdgR7gHjJQ3tMfR_MHgjznOSipdEa/view?usp=sharing)
[pytorch exercise](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1WLxIBPziQet4kbcAIuLpw3Th3gLw5Bes?usp=sharing)
      
